---
title: (Conceptual) Calculus 
date: 2023-11-20 11:33:00 +0800
categories: [NLP]
tags: [overview, done]
math: true
mermaid: true 
---

Welcome to my notes on Fundamental Concepts in Calculus, designed as a **short conceptual guide** for students and enthusiasts alike. These notes aim to demystify calculus, making it more approachable and understandable, especially for those who appreciate a visual and intuitive learning style. Since the emphasis is on the *concepts*, this guide is less authoritative and encompassing as my other posts, but should be helpful to build an intuition for Calculus regardless.

Please note that these materials assume some basic knowledge in algebra and pre-calculus. A visual and geometric approach is often emphasized, making complex concepts more tangible.

Here is the table of contents

**[The Essence of Calculus]("/posts/essence")**: What is calculus really about?

**[Limits]({{ 'posts/limits' | relative_url }})**: Introduction the concept of limits. The formal definition of limts, evaluating them in multiple contexts, and some relevant theorems.

**[Derivatives]({{ 'posts/derivatives' | relative_url }})**: Introduction to the concept of derivatives. The standard derivatives formulas and most relevant derivatives. Also, the most essential tricks relating to derivatives.

**[Applications of Derivatives]({{ 'posts/derivatives-applications' | relative_url }})**: What can you do with derivatives?

**[Integrals]({{ 'posts/integrals' | relative_url }})**: Introduction to definite and indefinite integrals. Definition and properties of each type of integral as well as how to compute them including the Substitution Rule. We will give the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus showing the relationship between derivatives and integrals. We will also discuss the Area Problem, an important interpretation of the definite integral.


**[Applications of Integrals]({{ 'posts/integrals-applications' | relative_url }})**: Essential applications of integrals.

**[Integration Techniques]({{ 'posts/integration-techniques' | relative_url }})**: Some more integration techniques

**[Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates]({{ 'posts/parametric-polar' | relative_url }})**: Introduction to the ideas of parametric equations and polar coordinates

**[Sequences and Series]({{ 'posts/sequence-series' | relative_url }})**: Introduction to sequences and series. Convergence, divergence, tc.


By the end of these chapters, you should have a solid grasp of the fundamental concepts of calculus, equipped with both the theoretical knowledge and intuitive understanding needed to tackle more advanced topics or apply these concepts in practical scenarios.
